We had the privilege of meeting up
once again with Gary Schwartz.
Last time we saw him, we were in London
eating sushi together.
In this interview, Gary shares his views
on what he calls self-science.
As a professor of medicine and psychology,
it's been a long journey to come to the conclusion
that we cannot wait for science
to validate what each one of us inherently knows,
that we must practice our own science
in our search for the greater truths.
Since we last interviewed you,
not since we last saw you,
you have been on an incredible, magical journey
which is quite interesting because you are a man who
epitomizes the world of science
and left-brain thinking on paper.
And in fact, that was your path, that has been your path.
And continues to be my path.
And continues to be your path
yet you seem to be embracing the magic of synchronicity
and I'm going to have you tell a story that's just fabulous
a little bit later, but first along that path of discovery
you talk about the world of self-science.
Now coming from your world, what does this mean
and how did you get there?
Self-science, well the term self-science actually
occurred to me relatively recently, within the past year.
Also in the past year, I published a book called
The G.O.D. Experiments, the God experiments,
which stands for guiding, organizing, designing process.
With the subtitle "How Science is Discovering God
"in Everything Including Us".
And it turns out that a subset of that book
includes experiments where I was the subject.
And because I'm so scientifically trained
and scientifically minded, as I began to discover anomalies
or try to experiment with things in my own personal life,
and then I would be hit with evidence
that I could not dismiss.
I began to realize that there was this process
of when you apply science to yourself,
that you can make certain discoveries
which may be inconsistent with the way in which
you've been educated.
Oh well yes. (laughs)
And not only that, I was actually beginning to meet people
in fact I had been for some time,
where they were also on their paths,
and whether they were physicians, or psychologists,
or physicists, or artists, or even one gentleman
who I actually describe in The God Experiments books,
he was an office cleaner.
They would be making discoveries
and then keeping track of the data
and following the evidence where it took them,
ultimately reaching them to conclusions that was
inconsistent with the way in which they were raised
but which they knew from the actual evidence
and the repeated evidence was true.
And then they went through their own personal transformation
which led them on the path that they were on.
And I was experiencing that myself in spades.
This is really critical.
This is a critical time in history as I've said
in so many interviews, and it's a cliche,
but it is true that people like yourself
are starting to experience this for themselves.
Yes, and I think what's slightly novel for me
is that I'm having the experience,
but because I'm doing it through the eyes of a scientist,
I'm actually finding how I can use the tools of science
to apply it to myself, and I'm seeing
other people do it as well.
And so therefore, you can ultimately come to prove
to yourself that this is the case.
And I'm currently now working on two books,
both of which relate to the question of self-science.
In one case, the whole book is based on experiences
that I've been collecting over the years
and continue to this day,
which is leading me to conclusions
which were very different than the way I was raised.
The second, which is a broader book,
actually tells the story of eleven different people
who have been on their path.
And that particular book, by the way,
I call The Self-Awakening Experiments,
and the subtitle is "Self-Science as the Key to
"Human Transformation and Global Healing."
And I think that's what people are doing.
By the way, that's what the ancient mystics did.
They were self-scientists.
Right, but until now,
there's been a huge giggle factor attached to anything
that doesn't have a double blind study.
Now how do you feel about that at this point
compared to maybe even five years ago.
Well there's a time and a place, first of all,
for double blind studies.
Of course it's very hard to do a double blind study
when you yourself are the subject,
unless you arrange it with other people
to actually test you under double blind conditions,
and I, by the way, have done that myself.
But I think what's more important is that
people have to understand that the essence of discovery
is not just other people finding out and then telling you
and giving you their evidence and their conclusions,
but the bottom line, ultimately, is how does it apply
in your life?
And can you... Does it fit within your own experience?
And can you use this to enhance your well-being
and the well-being of others?
So I've become ever stronger in recognizing
science shouldn't be left to the scientists.
Science should be part of all of our lives,
and therefore, we should all become in our own ways...
Our life is a laboratory.
It is, and our bodies and our electrical fields
and all of it is a laboratory.
Exactly.
And if science is the pursuit of truth,
then where do you find the truth in self-science?
How do you recognize it?
Even more interesting is that certain truths
can only be discovered through self-science.
Matter of fact, I was just thinking about this this morning.
Here at this conference, where I was looking at a particular
set of connections, where only I, who had the data
about my particular life, would know that at a particular
dinner, when a particular set of information occurred,
that that information was salient, number one, to me,
and then I would later see it connected
to this whole web of other things happening,
so I am the one to connect the dots.
I mean others can help us connect the dots,
but ultimately, only we have the total collection
of our information.
It means of course we have to become better witnesses,
we have to become better observers of self,
we have to become more reliable
in our tracking of the information,
otherwise we start... We can build castles of sand,
we can make imaginary stories which don't actually
fit with reality, so we have to check and double check
and apply the best of science to ourselves.
And when we do, there's all kinds of magic
to be discovered.
Well now how do you know the truth
when it's happening?
Well I was sort of a...
I have a problem in this area
because I was raised to be, as my writing partner puts it,
an orthodox agnostic.
(laughs) Okay.
And what that means is whether the question is
"Is there gravity?" or "Is there God?"
It doesn't matter what the question is,
my approach to life is, my answer is
I don't know, could be yes, could be know,
show me the data, I'm open.
Now the upside of that is, I've come to discover,
is it makes for actually a good scientist.
You're open minded, you're going to follow any hypothesis
whether it fits or does not fit
with the prevailing understanding or dogma.
But the downside is personal.
When do you have enough data to make a decision?
Yes, that's why I asked this question.
How much data do you have to collect
under how many circumstances before you're willing to say
I give in, I give up, I surrender.
In our previous interview...
Or the hill which may just say
Ah, I see, I know.
Yeah, some people, one or two pieces of information
and they accept that it's true.
I'm so conservative in that regard
that I have to be hit over the head
over and over and over
and even when I've collected mounds of data,
if it's against the way in which I was raised,
I keep looking for excuses or alternative ways
to view the data before I'm going to come to a conclusion.
So it's a great challenge.
In fact, in a previous interview that we did about
the afterlife, I'm sure you remember...
Yes.
A year and a half or so after, I remember
being in the dining room one day
and realizing and saying essentially to the universe,
look, I've gotta have so much data
that the data backs me into the corner
and I cannot escape.
Because if I could find a way to escape
or to get back up the fence, I would.
By the way, one of my students
a couple years ago said to me,
you know Gary he says,
you don't, when you fall off the fence,
you don't give up the fence.
What you do is you move the fence.
(laughs)
So for me, the decision is when do I move the fence
to be at a new level to ask new questions.
Right, right. So you still have to
go through this process, in fact I'm going to have you
tell a story about your synchronous journey
that's happening and still unfolding at this time
in a little bit here, and it's interesting
because you seem to marvel at each one,
and it's, again, how many times does this have to go
bonk, bonk, bonk before you realize,
wow, this is all magic?
And yet, you do understand that.
You're learning you cannot avoid it.
Well here's what I hope will never happen to me,
so I actively try to keep it alive.
I never want to take it for granted.
I never want to lose humility about it.
I never want to lose appreciation for the wonder.
The magic of it.
The magic and mystery of it.
And so therefore, even though I may come to the conclusion
yes this happens, and I can even look forward to it,
I'm going to be as surprised and celebrated
as a new piece of data comes along.
It's more fun that way anyway.
And it absolutely nurtures the fun
and makes living even more exciting
rather than less exciting...
I agree with you.
The more you have of these events.
I've been having these kinds of events
for probably about 25 years,
and even recognizing and connecting the dots,
yet every time, I still feel like a child
and it still amazes me.
Why? Well I don't know why, but it makes it feel better.
Actually I enjoy it even more as a result
of not taking it for granted.
That is fantastic.
Well that's one of the reasons why
not only did you ask me to do this interview,
but you've insisted that I even tell the story,
which I'm now agreeable to do.
I should just share with you, by the way,
that my first journey into the question of synchronicity
occurred actually mathematically,
and it had to do with a set of events
that were related to the number 11.
And then a whole series of synchronicities related to that
and I ultimately included a chapter
in The God Experiments book
called Synchronicity in New York City
where I illustrated how synchronicity,
if it's of an extreme nature,
can actually provide us with evidence
for a larger process intelligence going on in life.
I finished the chapter, it's in the book,
and both my editor and writing partner said
Gary, you can't include this in the book.
He said, this is gonna push too many people
beyond their boggle factor.
And I said, but it happened.
This is real data, I've got the evidence here.
This is very important evidence, this is on the path.
So how do we deal with this?
So what I suggested was
look I have to keep this in the book,
so I put it in Appendix C
and I mentioned it briefly to the reader in the text
so some people could find out it was there.
That's where all the juicy stuff ends up.
Right, I put it in Appendix C,
well often that's where a lot of boring stuff is
but it's also, this is anything but boring,
and it's in Appendix C, and so it was published in that book
and at this particular conference
that you are interviewing me at,
I actually decided to come out of the closet
and share some of the later sets of synchronicities
which are making up this other book
which is now almost completed.
Yes, and that was very brave of you.
I'm glad you did that because it really set the stage
for now being able to share more openly
some other, more magical things that have occurred.
Do we even need to get into any of the science of this
at this time?
Because what you talk about is that
order does not occur by chance, nor does randomness
occur by chance.
Do you care to maybe set this up by explaining that?
Sure, I'll briefly explain this.
And this is described in some detail in The God Experiments.
I accidentally, many years ago,
this was early 1980s when I was a professor at Yale,
I came to realize that there was a fundamental inconsistency
disconnect between the statistics of
how we understand probability and randomness,
and systems theory and quantum physics,
and the way the world actually works.
And this disconnect is not recognized
by most scientists today.
The simple way to understand this is in two ways.
One is in sort of an experiment that anybody can do,
and the other is in a simple way of
understanding simply the logic.
I'm gonna take you through the logic first
and the experiment second.
Because the logic is slightly more boring
and you'll be interested to know how to prove this yourself.
In statistics we're told that in order to get
what's called a random distribution of numbers
two things must be true.
One is that each event must be independent
of every other event.
So each time you flip the coin, the coin flip must be new.
The history of the previous coin flips
can't affect the current flip.
And the second corollary of that is
that the coin can't change over time.
So if it's going to be independent,
therefore the coin can't wear out,
you can't learn how to flip the coin,
there can't be other forces that are operating on this
and so on.
And under conditions of complete independence
and absolute no change, and you can model this,
you will actually get a normal distribution.
And the more times you flip the coins,
the more times you will get a perfect normal distribution.
And it happens 100 percent of the time.
100 percent of the time you get this distribution.
Now the question is, to what extent
does nature meet these criteria?
Well here's what physics tells us.
Even Newton 300 years ago said
every object that has mass has a gravitational pull.
This gravitational pull goes in all directions.
That means each object is pulling on every other object
in the universe, to various degrees,
and gravity extends out to infinity.
So therefore it means that you can't move any one thing
without influencing or affecting any other thing.
In fact, by the way, this vision of gravity,
of these invisible force fields
that held everything together unconditionally,
whether it was a white star, a black star, light dark,
didn't matter what was going on,
was completely unprejudicial attractive force
mutually holding everything together
and that was actually a scientific expression
of Darwin's vision of a loving divinity.
It was the invisible force of God.
Because he was also a mystic.
So gravity tells us you can't have randomness
in physical objects.
In fact physical objects aren't random.
We drop an object and it falls down
100 percent of the time.
There's no randomness here.
Secondly, then we look at what we learn
in electromagnetic fields.
Electromagnetic fields extend out into space,
and everything is connected to everything else
by electromagnetic fields.
So electrons and protons, all of these objects
that have any charges,
they can't be independent of everything else.
And then you get at the quantum level,
where you have entanglement...
Absolute entanglement, yes.
Even photons, which have been initially connected,
no matter how far apart, you affect one,
the other one happens.
So if nothing in the universe is independent,
and then you add systems theory,
which says that anything that's ciruclating
actually creates and has feedback,
shows an evolution of memory over time,
and everything is a system according to systems theory,
the two very fundamental properties
to get randomness don't exist.
Don't exist, yes.
If they don't exist,
you can't use randomness as an explanation
for the origin and evolution of order in the universe
because the universe doesn't meet the criteria.
And in fact if you model the way the universe really is,
you don't get randomness.
That's why we see all this order in the universe.
So that was the initial conceptual realization.
Now I'll give you the playful, experimental one.
And the simplest way to say this,
particularly since we're in the southwest,
is to use an example of a sand painting.
And let me illustrate it by way of
doing a simple experiment.
Imagine we have a plastic container
and in it we have white sand.
And what we do with black is we put
a particular design on the sand.
We make a cross, or we make a Jewish star,
or we draw a heart, or we draw a brain,
or we write in the word God, G-O-D,
or we write in the word dog, it doesn't matter.
You put in a pattern.
Then what we do is we put a cover on it,
and it's nice if it's a clear plastic cover.
You shake it a little bit,
then you open it and look what happens.
You close it again, you shake it,
you look what happens again.
You shake it, you look what happens again.
Here's the question.
Does the cross turn into a star?
Does the heart turn into a brain?
Does the God turn into a dog or something else?
No.
What happens is the sand mixes.
And the more you shake it,
the more the little black pieces begin
to evenly distribute among the white pieces,
and therefore, what this tells us is
in the absence of an organizing agent,
at least when we're dealing with sand,
what nature does is it mixes.
You get the same order over and over,
which is this balanced mixture.
So if in the absence of an organizing process,
with sand right now, we know that what it does is it mixes.
Then what would happen if we're walking along the beach
and we came upon this beautiful colored
fiction painting of a... that we see, for example,
the native American shamans make,
what's the probability that it could've happened
by, quote, "chance", meaning no organizing system.
Well the answer is zero.
It's not like the skeptic would say,
or the atheist would say,
well gee if we wait long enough,
there's some chance that it's going to come together.
No.
What we can do, and if you don't trust this,
do the experiment.
Of course I didn't trust it, so I was doing
shaking sands and I was doing all this stuff.
You find out no, in fact what physics tells us,
quite the contrary.
It mixes.
Yes.
And therefore, what's the probability
if we're walking along and we find some
elegant, beautiful sand painting in the sand.
What's the probability that some sort of
a guiding, organizing, and designing process,
in this case, it could be a human, or a little god,
that was doing this.
The answer is, it's 100 percent.
And it was that realization, those two early realizations
that set me on the path to becoming open
to discovering organizing principles in nature.
And that's what ultimately led to then, I think,
to start seeing, among other things, synchronicities.
Okay, so let's...
We're going to start along that journey
and you just reminded me of something,
maybe we'll talk about it toward the end,
about organizing principles.
But most people still to this day,
when something happens of the synchronistic nature,
say, oh, just a coincidence.
Can you talk about how...
What is the correlation between
the subject of randomness and coincidence?
Well first of all, people use the word randomness
very loosely, and I will argue actually, inappropriately.
So for example, we know, take the number for pi.
Mathematicians have taken it out to billions of digits
and they can't find, figure out what makes this
pattern of numbers occur.
And because they can't figure it out
and it seems to have no repeating order,
they call it, quote, "random."
And yet, every time they divide the numbers,
you get the same pattern.
So how could something that's, quote, "random,"
happen 100 percent of the time?
There's a disconnect here.
The alternative expression is it's not, quote, "random,"
all that means is we're not yet smart enough
to figure out what the pattern is.
And we may never know what the complete set of rules are
to create a particular pattern,
but if it happens 100 percent of the time,
it's not, quote, "random," by definition.
So the word randomness, I think,
is used very loosely and inappropriately.
It's one of those great myths.
We used to think the vacuum was empty,
and then we know the vacuum is filled with energy,
and information, and matter, and so on and so forth.
So the word vacuum is the wrong word.
We should get rid of that word.
Well random is the wrong word.
Having said that,
if an event happens just once,
it may or may not have any significance or meaning,
or replicability.
But if it happens twice, and then it happens three times,
and then it happens four times,
the more consistently it happens in a finite period of time,
in multiple places, the more it, quote, "replicates,"
the more, as a scientist, you come to the conclusion
that there is a definable pattern here,
and then we can look for what explains the origin
and the potential meaning of that pattern.
Yes. Okay so, we're going
to move beyond the realm of,
even if it's misstated, randomness and coincidence,
and we're going to move into the realm now,
of genuine synchronicity and how this magic unfolded
in your life in quite an unexpected way
through a member of the animal kingdom.
Let's now tell the story of the raven.
And because I don't know how much time we have on tape,
we'll just kind of make it slightly condensed.
Not too condensed, but just slightly.
Okay, let me ask the question, do you want
a one minute version, the five minute version, the ten...
Oh we'll take a 15 minute version.
Okay then we can do this properly.
Oh yes, we want to do that.
This particular synchronicity,
which involves a particular bird called a raven,
was actually the third category of synchronicities
that I had already charted.
So the first one were elevens,
and I wrote about the first set of those
in Appendix C of The God Experiments book.
The second had to do with dragonflies,
which is another whole journey,
and is part two of this new book that I'm writing.
The third one has to do with ravens.
So I already had one and two,
which then prepared me to be open to three.
So let's start with the idea that there's this person,
who is me, who has been collecting this data
which seems just impossible, but it's happening.
As I think Sir William Crookes said,
I didn't say it was possible, I said it happened.
And here's the story.
A little over two years ago,
four women came to visit with me
after the death of a very distinguished Harvard professor,
also very controversial, by the name of John E. Mack.
Yes, yeah, wonderful man.
And they wanted to talk about
doing some research in his honor.
One of these women was a psychiatrist by the name of
Dr. Diane Powell.
And she's phenomenally trained.
Has her M.D. from Johns Hopkins,
she'd been an assistant professor at Harvard,
she had been on the faculty at UC San Diego,
she then went into private practice
and ultimately divorced and went up into Ashland, Oregon
and has a private practice, just completed a major book,
and works part-time for the Institute of Noetic Sciences.
Very distinguished woman.
And she's very functional
in the left side of the brain.
She is very functional.
She is a remarkable and seemingly sane woman.
I was so impressed with her, that I wanted
to get to know her a little better,
and I said could we have lunch together.
So we did, we had lunch.
And for 45 minutes, she starts telling me this story,
which we could fill up our whole time with,
about her experience with ravens
and how these ravens were... she had noticed them
when she was in San Diego,
and they would perch on her window
and sometimes make funny noises
at meaningful moments in therapy
and then they would squawk at her when she would walk around
and she started getting interested in ravens
and what would ravens mean,
and then she looked into her family history
and it turned out that they were...
The name Raven was connected to her past,
anyway, it's a long journey.
And I'm listening to this and I'm saying,
why is this brilliant psychiatrist telling me this,
technical scientific term, cockamamie story about ravens?
So I'm stepping back and because this is an anomaly in life,
no one ever had ever talked to me about ravens,
and I didn't want to talk to her about ravens,
I started thinking, could this be meaningful?
That's the first possibility.
Is there something... is this the beginning
of a synchronicity?
And I began to realize that I collect Southwest
and Pacific Northwest coast art.
I've done so for over 30 years.
And there's a lot of birds,
and I know that I have some eagles,
but I began to wonder whether I'd been collecting ravens
and didn't know it.
And so I said, would you mind quickly visiting my house?
I collect Native American art,
and I said, I'd like to know whether I had any ravens.
So she comes over to my house and lo and behold,
I discover that I have been living with ravens,
collecting them, and didn't know it.
I have this raven that's about one foot high,
it's a man actually, a dancer,
and he's wearing this long mask
that turns out to be a raven mask.
I have another carving that's about this big,
I always thought it was a duck,
it turns out to be a raven.
There was a wall hanging, it's two feet by one foot carved,
and it turns out to be a raven.
You didn't study in zoology did you? (laughs)
No, I did take zoology, I took a year of zoology
and I properly forgot virtually everything I learned
within ten or fifteen minutes after each exam.
Because I don't remember things very well
unless I'm going to be using them.
Use them or lose them, I forget them.
So continue on, so you kept seeing more and more
of these ravens...
Yeah, so for example, I have two Kwakiutl ceremonial masks
one of them was an eagle, I knew it,
the other was this funny little bird, it was a raven.
Turns out that I had seven or eight ravens,
I don't remember, at the time.
I had been living with them.
And I said, gee that's a little interesting,
maybe I need to learn about ravens.
So then I went to the internet and looked up ravens,
and it turns out that I learned that ravens
have this history in the Pacific Northwest coast lore
in particular.
That they are messengers between the spirit world
and the physical world.
And also, there are these stories,
where ravens were actually related to the great spirit,
and it was the raven who actually came
and brought light to humanity.
So the raven is actually very much related
to the manifesting, the reawakening, the creative process.
So I'm saying this is very interesting.
Two days later... it's just interesting.
Two days later, a family that has been waiting
to see me for months
happens to have, through my administrative assistant,
scheduled a dinner at what's called the Arizona Inn,
a beautiful place in Tucson, very close to my laboratory.
Their son had died. He was in his forties.
He died under very tragic circumstances,
and he loved animals.
And his family had been wanting to see me,
and they came with a photographic album
because they wanted to get my opinion about this
because they couldn't believe it.
They tell me the story about how after their son died,
they have a home somewhere in the Midwest,
and also in Tempe.
And in their home in the Midwest,
shortly after their son died,
these ravens started coming onto their back porch,
which they didn't do before,
and there was one raven in particular, apparently,
it was squawking, it wouldn't go away, so on and so forth.
And then when they drove from this home to Tempe,
they claim that this raven followed them.
And then they claim that the raven was now in Tempe
and it would sit in this tree over their house.
She showed me pictures of this raven and so on,
and then there was one picture that was sort of fuzzy
that she said looked like the face of her son
near the raven.
Now normally if I had heard a story like this,
I would have thought these people were crazy.
But because I had just had a psychiatrist
do something weird telling me about all these
raven synchronicities, which sounded empirically like
I couldn't dismiss them.
I'm then living with a whole bunch of ravens
and didn't even know it.
Yeah, loads of raven roommates.
Right. (laughs) Raven roommates. Thank you.
You're welcome.
That's a take home message for me from this interview.
That's great.
And now this family's here.
I'm saying to myself, should I be taking this seriously?
So I learned more about ravens.
I learned they're really smart.
I learned, for example, that they can learn to speak
equal, if not better than the African Gray Parrot.
I also learn that I've been reading about
Rupert Sheldrake's work and his claims that
parrots could read the minds of humans
and there are these telepathy experiments,
and I begin to wonder, is it possible
that ravens could be taught to speak,
and since they're so connected to the spirit world,
maybe they could serve like mediums.
Well since you've done all these
medium experiments with Allison DuBois and many others...
Exactly, and there's always a criticism that
the mediums are doing it for money...
And they're not temperamental.
and the fraud, and everything else.
This would make it so much easier.
You keep them in a cage, you don't have to pay them so much,
I mean they're just... You don't have to deal with them
being on television, I mean,
there's really a lot of advantages.
Practical.
Practical. So I was just fantasizing about this
and wondering what it would be like to have a pet raven.
Would it be even possible to do this?
Well it just so happened that a few weeks later
I was to come to Santa Fe,
which is where this interview is taking place,
to speak at a conference on science and consciousness,
where I was talking about life after death,
the afterlife experiments.
And I'm in Santa Fe, and I discover
there are a lot of ravens in Santa Fe,
of course I didn't know this.
And I'm taking a walk just past the square,
and there is this particular gallery,
and on this gallery there outside
there is this wooden bench.
And there's this raven, this gigantic raven,
sitting on this bench.
I couldn't believe it.
I'm walking up to this raven, it's not going away,
and then I notice it's not moving.
Turns out it's a statue.
A statue by a man by the name of,
I subsequently learned, of Jim Eppler.
And he makes raven statues,
gigantic, beautiful raven statues.
And I'm saying, oh my god, here's a raven statue,
how often do you bump into a raven statue
sitting on a bench, so I sat on the bench
and I played with it.
I went in the store and started looking at their ravens.
And this woman, Dr. Diane Powell,
she had also come to this meeting,
so I invited her to come over to see this raven,
because she's the person who introduced me
to the raven process.
And I took a picture of her with her petting the raven.
It's the morning that I'm now to give my talk,
and in the shower it occurs to me,
I wonder whether I should end my talk
with the story about ravens.
Now I often tell the story that comes from William James,
he has this quote which says,
"In order to disprove the law that all crows are black,
"you need only find one white crow."
I said, well gee, what would happen
if it was changed slightly?
In order to disprove the law that all ravens are black
all you need is one white raven.
I wonder if there are any white ravens?
So I went on the internet and looked up,
it turns out there are all kind of mystical stories
about white ravens and albino ravens and so on.
I said, okay, I'm going to end this talk
with a slide called "The Journey Continues".
I would show the picture of Diane petting the raven,
because I'm in Santa Fe, and I would raise the question
about animals communicating
and spirit communicating through animals
and the connection between animals
and is this just mythology or is this more?
Well after I showed this slide,
the audience was just phenomenal,
and I start hearing people telling me raven stories.
This opened this whole slew of now people telling me
about their raven experiences.
I told you mine yesterday, in fact.
It seems rather common.
Yes, in fact, I've now actually decided to do a book
about raven stories and people telling their raven stories
because it's so much fun.
Anyway, I'm now leaving for Turkey.
This is where it starts getting weird.
Because up to now, this is just,
it's interesting but so what?
I don't know what it means.
I'm at the Tucson airport, and I stop,
and as I like to do when I fly,
particularly long trips,
whatever paperback or hardcover happens
to be available that has something to do with a mystery
I'll buy it.
And there was this one particular mystery
by these two authors which I had never read before,
but it had to do with an FBI agent and a policeman
and they were going to solve some crimes.
And I said I'll buy it, and I'll read it
coming back from Turkey, it's a long flight.
So I just put it away.
I get to Turkey, and I start wondering,
I'm about to prepare my talk,
should I end it with this raven slide?
Because people were really interested in this.
But then I said to myself,
does Turkey have any connection to ravens?
I don't mean the bird to the bird, I mean the country.
This occurred to me in the shower,
so I got out of the shower and I typed in
"Turkey country raven," because if I typed in
turkey and raven, I'd get two birds.
I discovered on the internet,
that Turkey actually has phrases,
national phrases, related to the raven.
And one of these phrases was,
turkeys see their chicks... turkeys see chicks as raisins...
It said, no, they said...
Ravens see chicks as falcons.
Ravens see chicks as falcons, what does that mean?
I don't know, but at least it's a saying.
So I said, I'm going to share this at the end of the talk.
Well my talk was sort of late in the afternoon
at their convention center.
It was a very big conference.
It was featured in their newspapers and so on.
And I ended the talk with this slide
of Diane petting this statue of the raven,
and afterwards, people come up to me
and they start telling me raven stories.
Now, we're now going to have dinner.
This is where it now gets weird.
We're about to have dinner, about 25 people,
at the hotel, fancy dinner.
We're around this long, square table, no seating assignment.
I end up having to sit in the corner.
This woman sits next to me who turns out to be
the executive director of the foundation
who invited us there,
and next to him sits Dr. Konstantin Korotkov,
a Russian physicist from St. Petersburg,
wonderful man, who I've known for the past few years.
And he has this wonderful Russian accent,
and I do it very badly, but I have to still at least honor
the Russian accent.
He had just flown in from St. Petersburg
and heard my talk and he says,
oh, he says, Gary it's wonderful to see you,
it was great presentation, he says.
I especially like the part about the raven.
I said, you liked the part about the raven?
He says, oh yes, very much so.
I said, why? And he says,
I really love ravens, in fact when I was in graduate school,
I had a pet raven.
I said, you had a pet raven?
I wish I had known this
before we interviewed him a couple days ago,
I would've asked him about it. (laughs)
(laughs) I said, you have a pet raven?
I'd never met anyone who had a pet raven.
I said, you gotta tell me the story.
So he goes and tells me this long story about his pet raven
which we don't have time for.
And now I'm sort of in shock.
And then he says, hey, you wanna hear
some Russian raven jokes?
(laughs)
I said, Russian raven jokes?
He's like, yeah, Russians we have lots of jokes,
including about ravens.
I said, well sure.
So he starts telling me these jokes.
Now at this point, you have to understand,
the whole table is silent,
because they're now listening to the two of us
as I'm going, what?
And he's making these very funny jokes,
which again, I don't remember.
And so after, there were people from Sweden,
and from England, and from America,
and from Italy and so on.
So I went around the table and I said,
how many of you from other countries,
do your countries have raven jokes?
Nobody.
I said, but my understanding is that in Turkey,
you have sayings about ravens.
So the Turks said, oh yes.
I said, do you know what this phrase means?
Ravens see chicks as falcons.
The woman sitting next to me, she says,
oh yes, but they didn't get the translation quite right.
The saying is, "Ravens see their chicks as falcons."
All of a sudden it hit me.
Because I don't know whether you've
ever seen a baby raven chick...
Never have.
I hadn't either, so I went on the internet and looked.
They are really ugly.
They look like little tarantulas.
They don't look cute through most people's standards.
They don't look like falcons.
No, they don't look at all like that.
But apparently, the raven mother sees this little infant,
she sees its potential and also sees its glory,
as to be able to be like a falcon.
And that's a deeply spiritual significance,
being able to see the potential beauty, and greatness,
and wonder in something which may look like
a rough cut diamond, for example.
So I said, oh, I've got it.
So I left that dinner, now in awe.
The next morning, I get to the conference,
and this woman who had been sitting next to me,
she says, Dr. Schwartz, I've written something
that's very important. Please read it.
She hands it to me.
I said thank you, put it in my pocket,
and I promptly forget it.
I'm at the conference, all these people,
they're telling me raven stories and stuff.
Well it's lunchtime, I'm late,
the whole group is then sequestered.
It happens again being a square table, different restaurant.
I get there late, turns out she gets there late.
We're now sitting next to each other.
She said did you read the paper?
I said no.
She said please do, so I take the paper out,
and she says, Dr. Schwartz you're not gonna believe this,
and by the way, I couldn't believe it.
She said, I was driving back to my province last night,
which is like (speaks foreign language)
I can't pronounce Turkish, it's of course written down.
And she says, I'm going into my town called
(speaks foreign language) or whatever.
(laughs) That'll do.
And she said, I realized that the town had a name,
and I went and looked it up,
and the town that I live in is named "Baby Raven"
or "Raven Chick."
So the woman that I'm sitting next to
who was between me and Konstantin,
who explained to me the meaning of the phrase
lives in a town called "Raven Chick."
Isn't that amazing.
At this point it's now too much.
Right.
I say...
You've been batted on the head a few times now.
I've now been hit a lot now.
See this is a lot of data.
Lots of lumps on your head.
A lot of lumps on my head, indeed.
I said, okay universe, enough.
I need a break.
I don't know what's going on,
but this is... I'm going back, I'm tired.
I'm just going to read my novel.
So I pull out this novel, and I start reading,
and it has to do with this FBI agent,
very wealthy, but he's concerned with
righteousness and goodness and so on, he's very gifted.
And this policeman, New York policeman.
And early on in the book, he talks about how
when he gets confused, he doesn't have the answer
to a question, he'll go out to his Great Aunt's estate,
again I have all this written down,
because if you don't chronicle this,
you're going to forget it,
so it's very important that you keep
very deep, clear records.
They get to the estate, and the estate was called
something like, Raven's Cry, or Raven's Nest.
It was Raven's something.
I have read hundreds and hundreds of mysteries,
and the average, it was weird.
I said well, that's just one raven.
I go along further in the book,
and about midway through, they're very hungry
and they're in France or something,
it's not important right now.
And they talk about how they were "ravenously hungry."
That's ravenously.
Now again, ravenously hungry,
ravenous is a fairly common word,
but it's not used in the average mystery,
and I noticed that.
I said, that's two ravens.
Then they go further along and now they're in Italy,
and they're being chased by these dogs,
these bad guys are after them and so on.
And the authors write that the barking of the dogs
sounded like cries of ravens.
How many authors describe dogs barking
as cries of ravens?
Exactly.
Now we've got three in this one book.
And I said, if there's any more, I'm in trouble.
The last chapter of the book, the policeman is looking
out into a field.
The FBI agent is missing,
they don't know if he's killed or not.
That will be told in the next book.
He's very forlorn, and he looks out over the field,
the authors write, and out on the field
is a lone, black raven.
At that point, I knew that these authors,
Preston and Child, they obviously have a thing about ravens,
otherwise they wouldn't have all these ravens in there.
And I'm saying to myself, what's the probability
that I would read a book and then save a book
and be reading this story, and that after I've had these
completely, if you add them all up,
within a very short period of time,
set of synchronicities about ravens?
How do we explain this?
And here's not the way to explain it.
It is true that if we start saying,
gee, I wonder if there's any connection to me
between myself and VW Bugs.
Well if you start looking for VW Bugs,
you're gonna find them,
because people drive these cars and they're around.
We don't notice them, but they've always been there
and we'll start noticing them,
and we can start collecting them.
But that doesn't mean that it's a synchronicity between
just because you notice them and their presence.
In order for it to be a synchronicity,
the event must be uncommon,
it must be tightly coupled in timing,
and they should be personally meaningful
to you in your life.
And when those set of things happen
and they happen repeatedly,
at this point your flag should go up,
and you should start saying okay,
what is this telling us about our life and the universe?
And the raven synchronicity has continued to this day.
If I could just share one little thing,
I get to this conference,
and now I've had so many raven synchronicities
that they're beyond beyond.
And it's now two years later, and I'm committed,
because Konstantin Korotkov is going to be here,
and I'm now writing this book.
I want to interview him and get these stories
of the raven jokes and his memory of what happened
at this conference as best as he can remember it,
so at least I'm citing his memory correctly.
So I said okay, when I just arrived at the hotel,
and I was looking forward to meeting him,
and who do I literally bump into,
I mean literally within a minute,
but Konstantin.
And before I get a chance...
You know, we hug each other and so on.
Before I get a chance to tell him
that I want to interview him about this thing, he says,
Gary, I'm glad to see you,
and he says, I have a surprise for you.
He says, you must come to my room right now,
we're gonna drink some wine.
I've got a bottle of Ravenswood wine.
(laughs)
Because he obviously now remembers the connection.
And so I say to myself, that's nice.
And again, it was the timing of all of this.
So again, we had...
It turns out it wasn't just me there,
but there were other people so we were actually...
Lots of people were able to hear this
and then the conversation went into other areas
that turned out to be very meaningful,
but I had all this down, and then I told him,
because he had not heard the post-Konstantin story.
He hadn't heard about the piece of paper
with the Raven's Chick town,
and he hadn't heard about this book.
And he didn't know that I was now on a quest,
that I now even have a ring that has a raven on it,
so that I carry this as a reminder of this specialness.
Well I leave that meeting and then I go into the...
What do you call those?
Concession?
What is it, concession or coffee shop,
not coffee shop, but where they sell
books and postcards and...
Yeah the little lobby gift shop.
Gift shop. I go to the gift shop.
There's a book set.
And on this set of books, is a paperback novel
by these two authors.
One that had been written ten years ago.
One that I had wanted to read,
but you don't typically find it.
It's not a very popular book.
But it was in this bookstore.
I said fantastic,
I wonder if there's going to be any ravens in this book.
I buy the book.
It turns out the reason why it's in this book
is because this particular story
takes place in New Mexico and involves Santa Fe and so on.
And so I buy this book and I said
wouldn't it be fun if the ravens continued.
I get the book, I go up to the room,
I have to quickly look just to see,
and I start reading the introduction.
The second line of the introduction talks about some sound
that they were hearing.
And they describe it as the cries of ravens.
Okay, here we, and there... Yes.
And it continues.
It continues.
And what's so marvelous about this is
how you can see the excitement, I can see the excitement
over the magic of it in you.
And how is this actually transforming the way
you're viewing the life experience?
Well imagine for the moment,
that all of us are part of a web of interconnection
for which there is some sort of a G.O.D. process
much more sophisticated than we've ever thought about.
I like to think of it, for example, as infinite intelligence
and if you really ponder what it means to have
an infinite level of intelligence,
an intelligence that could be so great
that it could even invent infinity.
It goes beyond anything that we can imagine.
But if you try to just live with that possibility,
just for the second, and then also recognize
that, so to speak, it can be in everything,
i.e., the all can be in the small,
and by the way, the word small
literally has the word all in it,
which is a very convenient way to remember this.
Then what happens is...
And then you combine this with systems thinking,
which is the idea that something
that's a part of something larger has feedback,
that the subsystem can be in contact with the system,
that the system can be in communication
with the super system,
you then recognize that if the all's in the small
and we're all part of this,
that we are then receiving communication
and then can be processing this,
and therefore, we can start asking even questions of it.
And then engage in a dialog,
or become a participant of the process,
a more mindful, conscious participant of the process.
And so what happens if we start living our lives
and we recognize that it's so complicated
that we're going to have to raise our intelligence
to see this intelligence.
And you do it with great humility and great openness.
You have to not reject and dismiss,
and at the same time you just don't want to
quote, "randomly" or sporadically pull things together
and build stories where they're not there.
So you have to do it with discernment.
When you do that, my experience has been,
over these past couple of years in particular,
is that the more willing you are to look for it,
you find it.
But the finding it is not just because
there are VW Bugs out to be seen.
But it appears that it's a dynamic process,
and the more that you ask for it,
the more that it, quote, "happens."
Now by the way, I can only validate that
in the context of my own life journey.
But once you now lay out the hypothesis
and you show people how to do this science,
they can then test it for itself,
and each of us can come to our own conclusions
about what happens if we begin to invite this.
Well imagine that you're now living with a daily awareness
of an interconnectedness of everything,
and you're open to more and more pieces
falling into place.
More and more people finding each other.
More and more people becoming open to this one intelligence.
Every day not only becomes filled with surprises,
but there's also great joy, and great hope,
and great humility, and great celebration,
and great wonder.
And also a great... Also a sense of peace.
Because at this point, what I say,
I say, okay universe, if you're really
playing a role in all this,
of course you're much bigger than I am.
Much, much, much bigger than I am.
If you're gonna be playing a role,
then you've gotta step up to the plate
and you've gotta help.
Or you've gotta tell us what we have to do.
You have to give us the cues.
And I mean no disrespect here,
but I essentially said to the universe,
put up or shut up.
Either give us the evidence that we need,
give us guidance, be a true guiding,
organizing, designing process,
or leave us alone.
But you have to be a participant.
There's responsibility both ways.
And also, there is this sense
that to the extent that we are given the opportunity,
each of us in our own way come to discover this,
then there's an element of accepting that
maybe there's more going on
than we as individuals are seeing.
And so we can step back and be more comfortable
about allowing the process to unfold,
and be willing to be in the student role and learn.
And if that means giving up certain beliefs
and stereotypes, and the way we were raised
as Jews, or Protestants, or Catholics, or Hindus,
or whatever...
If that's what it means, then...
But that's been the history of our evolution anyway.
We used to think the Earth was flat,
well we didn't get it quite right.
It looks that way sort of,
but that's not the way it is.
We used to think the sun was revolving around the earth.
Well yes that's what we used to think,
but we didn't get it quite right.
We used to think that objects were mostly solid.
Well now we know it looks that way,
but that's not exactly quite right.
If it means we have to change our minds, big deal.
It's okay.
That's what the whole purpose of growing is all about.
It's not just sitting back and not taking responsibility,
but there is this element of, if you would,
trusting the process.
And I say this as a scientist who says,
give me the data or leave me alone.
By the way, I have a dear friend,
his name is Dr. James Levine,
who has been a very important person in my life.
He's played multiple roles in multiple books and so on,
and one of his pet phrases that he shared to me lately,
he says, you know Gary, you cannot gag the universe.
On that, I just want to thank you.
Beautiful.
Thank you for the opportunity
to share part of the adventure.
(peaceful instrumental music)
We'll visit with Gary again when his new books come out.
To pick up a copy of The God Experiments
or another of Gary's books,
click on the link to Amazon below.
Meanwhile, another scientist, laser physicist
Russell Targ also came to understand
the essence of what makes us human
by coming through the back door.
Known to many as the original X-Files guy,
you will likely find his story intriguing as well.
Until next time, thanks for watching.